Create scs-XXXX-v1-default-rules-for-security-groups.md (#525)
SovereignCloudStack/standards: Standards/scs-XXXX-v1-default-rules-for-security-groups.md

---
title: Default Rules for Security Groups
type: Standard
status: Draft
track: IaaS
---

## Introduction

Security Groups in IaaS (OpenStack) are part of the network security mechanisms provided for the users.
They resemble sets of virtual firewall rules allowing specific network traffic at a port of a VM that connects it to a network.

> They are project-bound, which means that all Security Groups that are newly created are only available to the project in that they were created.

Reviewer: s/in that/in which/

This is also the case for the default Security Group that is created for each project as soon as the project itself is created.

## Terminology

Security Group (abbr. SG)
  Set of ip table rules, used for tenant network security.

Security Group Rule (abbr. SG Rule)
  A single ip table rule, that is part of a SG.

Administrator (abbr. Admin)

>   Operator = User of an OpenStack cloud with the admin role.

Reviewer: Do we need to distinguish this from the domain admin?

Reviewer: I am a bit out of the loop.

So what I'm basically asking is this: If there is conceivably more than one role which could be addressed by "admin", it would be good to clarify which admin is referred to (and if for instance the "domain-scoped manager" (which I personally could see as an admin of some kind) does not have the necessary permissions to do this, then it's worth mentioning that I think).

Reviewer: Works for me.

## Motivation

> The rules of a Security Group can be edited by any user with the member role within a project.

Reviewer: Add a ".. _by default_ by any user with the member role .." here, or refer to an SCS standard which specifies the member role to allow that.

But when a Security Group is created it automatically incorporates a few SG rules that are configured as default rules.
Since the 2023.2 release, this set of default rules can be adjusted by administrators[^1][^2].
In combination with the OpenStack behavior that when a VM is created with no Security Group specified, the default SG of the project is automatically applied to the ports of the VM,
a user cannot be sure which firewall rules are applied to such a VM.

Therefore this standard proposes default Security Group rules that MUST be set by administrators to avoid differences in default network security in different IaaS environments.

[^1]: [Tracking of development for editable default SG rules](https://bugs.launchpad.net/neutron/+bug/1983053)
[^2]: [Release Notes of Neutron 2023.2](https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/neutron/2023.2.html)

## Design Considerations

> Until the 2023.1 release (antelope) the default Security Group rules are hardcoded in the OpenStack code.

Reviewer: Language nitpicks: Until + present tense reads oddly to me, I suggest to:

- Use `Up to` or `Before` instead of `Until`, or
- Use past tense

(but native speakers are welcome to override this suggestion)

> We should require to not change this behavior through code changes in deployments.

Reviewer: Did you mean: "We should not require to .." instead of "We should require to not .."?

Beginning with the 2023.2 release (bobcat) the default Security Group rules can now be edited by administrators through an API.

> All rules that should be present as default in Security Groups MUST be configured by admins through this API.

Reviewer: Please discuss in the design considerations the two options:

1. Mandate that admins set a specific set of rules
2. Mandate that users should always explicitly set security groups

Elaborate the trade-offs and motivate the eventual choice.

Author: I have done a discussion on this, please review it and tell, if it is what you suggested

> All rules that should be present as default in Security Groups MUST be configured by admins through this API.

Reviewer: "All rules that should be present as default in Security Groups MUST be configured by admins through this API." 

This is just a statement of a fact about OpenStack, not an interoperability requirement, isn't it?

In that case, use of "MUST" is not appropriate.

### Open questions

The requirement to not change the default code of earlier OpenStack releases is difficult to test.
It should be considered to only apply this standard onto versions of OpenStack that implement the new endpoint for the default Security Group rules, which would only include 2023.2 or higher releases.

It is possible to have different default Security Group rules for the default SG and custom SGs.
And it is arguable to have a more strict standard for default rules for the default Security Group than for the custom Security Groups.
Because the latter ones are not automatically applied to a VM but are always edited by the users to apply to their requirements.

> The whitelisting concept of Security Group rules makes it hard to allow traffic with an exception of certain ports.

Reviewer: s/whitelisting/allowlisting/

> It would be possible to just define many rules to achieve what a blacklist would achieve.

Reviewer: s/blacklist/blocklist/

> This has the severe downside that users could be confused by these rules and will not disable unnecessary default rules in their SGs.

Reviewer: It is not clear to me what this discussion contributes to the standard for default rules. Please motivate it (e.g. if there was discussion to have a default ruleset which allows most stuff but blocks often-abused services like NFS/rpcbind, DNS etc., then please add that information).

Author: I rephrased the sentence.

## Standard

The default Security Group rules for the default Security Groups SHOULD allow incoming traffic from the same Security Group.
The default Security Group rules for ALL Security Groups MUST NOT allow any other incoming traffic. Neither IPv4 nor IPv6.
This can be achieved through having ingress rules in the default Security Group rules that allow ingress traffic from the Remote Security Group "PARENT" but are only used in the default Security Group.

The default Security Group rules for ALL Security Groups SHOULD allow egress Traffic for both IPv4 and IPv6.

> This standard does not forbid to also disallow all outgoing traffic making the existence of egress rules OPTIONAL.

Reviewer: "This standard does not forbid to also disallow all outgoing traffic making the existence of egress rules OPTIONAL."

I don't understand this sentence fully. Could you please elaborate what is the intent behind this interop statement?

Author: I removed this sentence, it is unnessecary.

> Allowing all outgoing traffic in the default rules in combination with blocking all incoming traffic would be strict enough from a security point of view.

Reviewer: This belongs in the Design Considerations section, not in the standard.

> And it would make it necessary for users to check and change the rules of their security group to a meaningful set.

Reviewer: Likewise (Design Consideration)

---
title: Default Rules for Security Groups
type: Standard
status: Draft
track: IaaS
---

## Introduction

Security Groups in IaaS (OpenStack) are part of the network security mechanisms provided for the users.
They resemble sets of virtual firewall rules allowing specific network traffic at a port of a VM that connects it to a network.
They are project-bound, which means that all Security Groups that are newly created are only available to the project in which they were created.
This is also the case for the default Security Group that is created for each project as soon as the project itself is created.

## Terminology

Security Group (abbr. SG)
  Set of ip table rules, used for tenant network security.

Security Group Rule (abbr. SG Rule)
  A single ip table rule, that is part of a SG.

Administrator (abbr. Admin)
  Operator = User of an OpenStack cloud with the admin role.

## Motivation

The rules of a Security Group can be edited by default by any user with the member role within a project.
But when a Security Group is created it automatically incorporates a few SG rules that are configured as default rules.

> Since the 2023.2 release, this set of default rules can be adjusted by administrators only[^1][^2].

Reviewer: That now makes it sound as if previous releases allowed everyone to edit the default rules.

Suggestion:

> Since the 2023.2 release, the default set of security group rules can be adjusted. This functionality is only available to administrators.

[^2]: [Release Notes of Neutron 2023.2](https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/neutron/2023.2.html)

## Design Considerations

Up to the 2023.1 release (antelope) the default Security Group rules are hardcoded in the OpenStack code.
We should not require to change this behavior through code changes in deployments.

Beginning with the 2023.2 release (bobcat) the default Security Group rules can now be edited by administrators through an API.
All rules that should be present as default in Security Groups have to be configured by admins through this API.

There are two ways to approach a standard for the default rules of security groups.

1. There could be a set of rules standardized that has to be configured by admins.
OpenStacks default rules for security groups already provide a good baseline for port security, because they allow all egress traffic and for the default security group only ingress traffic from the same group.
Allowing more rules would not benefit the security level, while reducing or limiting the existing rules would barely improve it.
Nevertheless a standard could hold up the current security level against possible future release with more open default rules.

> Changing the default rules will not change the rules any existing security groups.

Reviewer: Formatting nitpick: I suggest to use paragraph breaks here (empty lines), to make this more readable in the rendered version. I.e.:

```
1. There could be a set of […].

   OpenStack default rules […].

   Allowing more rules […]. 
   Nevertheless a standard could uphold […].
   Changing the default rules […].
```

Reviewer: This one is still relevant.

Author: I adjusted it.

Reviewer: Looks still the same to me, did yoou push your fixes?

2. With the already strict OpenStack default rules users are required in most use cases to create and manage their own security groups.
This has the benefit that users need to explicitly think about the port security of their VMs and may be less likely to apply security groups which rules open up more ports than needed.

> There is also a guide from the SCS on how to set up a security group that also focuses on having a good port security[^3].

Reviewer: Likewise.

Reviewer: Likewise.

Author: I adjusted it.

With the default OpenStack behavior of having already strict rules, which in most cases require users to manage their own security groups, this standard should mandate a middle way:
It should allow adjusting the default rules, but only to stricter version.
Allowing all outgoing traffic in the default rules in combination with blocking all incoming traffic would be strict enough from a security point of view.
And it would make it necessary for users to check and change the rules of their security group to a meaningful set.

[^3]: [Guide for Security Groups](https://docs.scs.community/docs/iaas/guides/user-guide/security-groups/)

### Open questions

The requirement to not change the default code of earlier OpenStack releases is difficult to test.

> It should be considered to only apply this standard onto versions of OpenStack that implement the new endpoint for the default Security Group rules, which would only include 2023.2 or higher releases.

Reviewer: This isn't really an open question, is it?

Code changes are unnecessary because, AFAICT, the setup the standard describes is identical to the setup already provided by stock OpenStack.

It is possible to have different default Security Group rules for the default SG and custom SGs.
And it is arguable to have a more strict standard for default rules for the default Security Group than for the custom Security Groups.

> Because the latter ones are not automatically applied to a VM but are always edited by the users to apply to their requirements.

Reviewer: What is the open question here?

The allowlisting concept of Security Group rules makes it hard to allow traffic with an exception of certain ports.
It would be possible to just define many rules to achieve what a blocklist would achieve.

> But having many rules may confuse users and they may not disable unnecessary default rules in their SGs.

Reviewer: What is the open question here?

| ed5cd662-add2-4e42-b0a7- | None        | IPv6      | ::/0      |            | ingress   | PARENT                | None                 | True                           | False                         |
| 3b585d348820             |             |           |           |            |           |                       |                      |                                |                               |
+--------------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------+------------+-----------+-----------------------+----------------------+--------------------------------+-------------------------------+
```

## Related Documents

The spec for introducing configurability for the default Security Groups Rules can be found [here](https://specs.openstack.org/openstack/neutron-specs/specs/2023.2/configurable-default-sg-rules.html).

More about Security Groups as a resource in OpenStack can be found [here](https://docs.openstack.org/nova/latest/user/security-groups.html).

## Conformance Tests

> The conformance tests should check for the absence of any ingress traffic rules in the `openstack security group rule list`.

Reviewer: The conformance test should also create a new security group and check that, too.

Author: What would be the improvement of this? The default security group rules are the ones used to create the rules in security groups. Testing both would not test the standard but would test for bugs in the openstack code applying the default rules to the security groups.
PLUS: to test this through creating security groups, it would also be necessary to create a new project, to have a brand new default security group. We should be able to test everything as non-admin users.

Reviewer: Because in the text as written, there is nothing which tests the configuration of the default security group rules, is there?

I might've missed some implicit test there, because I'm not deeply in the matter. But we are defining rules for the default security group, so that those rules are in effect should be tested.

Author: We discussed this: there was a mistake in the standard. I am testing the "openstack default security group rule list" endpoint, not the `openstack security group rule list`. I changed this.

> As having egress rules is allowed by this standard, but not forced and can be set in various ways, there will not be any tests for such rules.

Reviewer: The standard explicitly says that egress SHOULD be allowed for both v4 and v6, so that should IMO be tested.

Reviewer 2: It's the default setting in Openstack. I'm not sure what we are gaining by testing it.

Reviewer 3: > It's the default setting in Openstack. I'm not sure what we are gaining by testing it.

Does the SCS mandate somewhere that CSPs may not deviate from OpenStack default settings unless SCS standards specify it?
If not, then I think the proposal is completely valid that we check a CSP has not changed this specific setting from its default (which would in turn violate the standard).

Reviewer: @markus-hentsch is exactly on point, @artificial-intelligence. If it's written in the standard, there should be a test for it, no matter whether it's a default or not.

Otherwise you can have a non-compliant cloud (because someone changed the defaults) and the compliance checker still gives the green check mark.

Author: I have tests for the presence of all OpenStack-default default SG rules.
Test for rules:
- ingress rules, that only allow traffic from the same SG
- egress rules, that allow all kind of egress traffic for all SGs in both IPv4 and IPv6

---
title: Default Rules for Security Groups
type: Standard
status: Draft
track: IaaS
---

## Introduction

Security Groups in IaaS (OpenStack) are part of the network security mechanisms provided for the users.
They resemble sets of virtual firewall rules allowing specific network traffic at a port of a VM that connects it to a network.
They are project-bound, which means that all Security Groups that are newly created are only available to the project in which they were created.
This is also the case for the default Security Group that is created for each project as soon as the project itself is created.

## Terminology

Security Group (abbr. SG)
  Set of ip table rules, used for tenant network security.

Security Group Rule (abbr. SG Rule)
  A single ip table rule, that is part of a SG.

Administrator (abbr. Admin)

>   Operator = User of an OpenStack cloud with the admin role.

Author: The "default Security Group rules" can be applied on both default and/ or custom security groups.
I will adjust your proposal accordingly and add it to the standard

>   Operator = User of an OpenStack cloud with the admin role.

Reviewer 3: Looks good, thanks!

## Design Considerations

Up to the 2023.1 release (antelope) the default Security Group rules are hardcoded in the OpenStack code.
We should not require to change this behavior through code changes in deployments.

Beginning with the 2023.2 release (bobcat) the default Security Group rules can now be edited by administrators through an API.
All rules that should be present as default in Security Groups have to be configured by admins through this API.

There are two ways to approach a standard for the default rules of Security Groups.

**1: There could be a set of rules standardized that has to be configured by admins.**

OpenStack's default rules for Security Groups already provide a good baseline for port security, because they allow all egress traffic and for the default Security Group only ingress traffic from the same group.

Allowing more rules would not benefit the security level, while reducing or limiting the existing rules would barely improve it.
Nevertheless a standard could hold up the current security level against possible future release with more open default rules.

> Changing the default rules will not change the rules of any existing security groups.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Changing the default rules will not change the rules of any existing Security Groups.
```

**2: With the already strict OpenStack default rules users are required in most use cases to create and manage their own Security Groups.**

This has the benefit that users need to explicitly think about the port security of their VMs and may be less likely to apply Security Groups which rules open up more ports than needed.

> There is also a guide from the SCS project on how to set up a security group that also focuses on having a good port security[^3].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is also a guide from the SCS project on how to set up a Security Group that also focuses on having a good port security[^3].
```

But when a Security Group is created it automatically incorporates a few SG rules that are specified by administrators since the 2023.2 release[^1][^2].
In combination with the OpenStack bevior that when a VM is created and no Security Group is specified, the default SG of the project is automatically applied to the ports of the VM,
a user cannot be sure which IP table rules are applied to such a VM.

Therefore this standard proposes default Security Group rules that MUST be set by administrators to avoid differences in default network security in different IaaS-Environments.

[^1]: [Tracking of development for editable default SG rules](https://bugs.launchpad.net/neutron/+bug/1983053)
[^2]: [Release Notes of Neutron 2023.2](https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/neutron/2023.2.html)

## Design Considerations

Until the 2023.1 release (antelope) the default Security Group rules are hardcoded in the OpenStack Code.
We should require to not change this behavior through code changes in deployments.

Beginning with the 2023.2 release (bobcat) the default Security Group rules can now be edited by administrators through an API.

> All rules that should be present at default in Security Groups MUST be configured ba admins through this API.

Reviewer 2: nit:
```suggestion
All rules that should be present as default in Security Groups MUST be configured by admins through this API.
```

| 47b929fd-9b39-4f22-abc5- | None        | IPv6      | ::/0      |            | egress    | None                  | None                 | True                           | True                          |
| 7d4f64d10909             |             |           |           |            |           |                       |                      |                                |                               |
| 92a79600-5358-4fef-a390- | None        | IPv4      | 0.0.0.0/0 |            | egress    | None                  | None                 | True                           | True                          |
| 822665f46070             |             |           |           |            |           |                       |                      |                                |                               |
+--------------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------+------------+-----------+-----------------------+----------------------+--------------------------------+-------------------------------+
```

> These rules can also be configured to only apply to custom Security Groups through the API.

Reviewer 3: Now that I think about it, I'm wondering if instead of quoting an arbitrary sample output of `openstack default security group rule create ... --for-custom-sg` we should rather provide more relevant commands to help CSPs to enforce the standard.

I think the following contents would make sense in the example section:

1. How to make sure that no ingress rules are defined for both custom and default SGs.
    - (The list output table above already does this, maybe just add a sentence about what to look out for, e.g. no rows with ingress in them etc.)
2. If any conflicting ingress rules exist, how to remove them using CLI commands.
3. For the optional egress rules just add a small hint that there is `--for-custom-sg` and `--for-default-sg` differentiation when using the CLI but do not include example outputs for the `create` command like below.

> These rules can also be configured to only apply to custom Security Groups through the API.

Author: Maybe that is a little bit too much for the standard and would better fit in a guide?
In the first version i just wanted to show, how the default SG rules table can be looked up, and how it is supposed to look.

> These rules can also be configured to only apply to custom Security Groups through the API.

Reviewer 3: Fair point. I think we should only keep the table above then and state that this is how it is supposed to look like with no conflicting ingress rules defined.

In turn, I think the example below about `--for-custom-sg` should be removed because it paints an incomplete picture on how to fully handle the different use cases. It could be used as a part of a guide in SovereignCloudStack/docs illustrating how to ensure that the standard is adhered to and how to handle setting up new rules in conformance with standard.

> These rules can also be configured to only apply to custom Security Groups through the API.

Author: done so with the creation of the docs PR: https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/docs/pull/167
